.TH SKI 1 "Development Tools" "Hewlett-Packard Company" \" -*- nroff -*-
.SH NAME
ski, bskinc \- An IA-64 Instruction Set Simulator
.SH SYNOPSIS
.BI "ski
.I [\-help] [\-i file] [\-rest file] [\-nonet]
.I "    [\-srcroot dir] [\-forceuser]  [\-forcesystem] [\-strace]
.I "    [\-palen n] [\-valen n] [\-ridlen n] [\-keylen n] [\-grfile n]
.br

.BI "bskinc
.I [\-help] [\-i file] [\-rest file] [\-noconsole] [\-nonet]
.I "     [\-forceuser] [\-forcesystem] [\-icnt file] [\-strace] [\-palen n]
.I "     [\-valen n] [\-ridlen n] [\-keylen n] [\-grfile n]
.br
.SH DESCRIPTION
Ski is an IA-64 instruction set simulator from Hewlett-Packard
Company.  It simulates the IA-64 architecture as defined by the
architecture manual.  This is not a full platform simulator, i.e., no
system chipset or PCI bus simulation is done.  However it supports the
full instruction set of the architecture, including privileged
instructions and associated semantics.
.PP
Ski can be used in two operating mode: user- and system-mode. In user
mode, you can run user level applications directly on top of the
simulator.  The emulation stops at the system call boundary. The
system call is emulated by calling the host OS, such as x86
Linux. Conversions between 64-bit and 32-bit parameters are done by
Ski as needed. This allows fast execution of user programs. Most
system calls are emulated, though the emulation is not always 100
percent accurate.
.PP
In system-mode, operating-system kernel development and execution is
possible because interrupts and virtual memory behaviors are
simulated. In this mode you can actually run the Linux kernel and,
once booted, user applications can be run on top of the simulated
kernel.
.PP
The ski simulator comes with three different interfaces. The simplest
one is the batch mode, called
.BR bskinc
. In this mode the simulator runs in non-interactive mode, very much like
a shell running a script.
.PP
There is also a full-text curses-based mode, where you can interact
with the simulator to inspect code, set breakpoints, etc. This version
is called
.BR
ski
.
.PP
All these modes provides the same core simulation, only the interface
is different.
.PP
.SS OPTIONS
.TP
.I "\-help"
Prints the list of supported options for the specific interface
required.  Not all options are available in every possible interface.
.TP
.I "\-nonet"
When running in kernel mode, this option tells the simulator not to
probe for existing Ethernet interfaces on the host. This way the Linux
kernel won't detect any device. This option is useful when you don't
want to run the simulator as root (or setuid to root). For networking
support root privilege is required.
.TP
.I "\-srcroot directory"
Specify the directory where the program sources can be found.  This
option is only useful when combined the "mixed mode" display (see the
"pm" command inside Ski).
.TP
.I "\-noconsole"
Do not use an xterm as the default output console, but use the current tty.
This option is only useful when ski is invoked in batch mode. It allows 
to run in the current terminal window. This is used mostly within the NUE(1)
environment.
.TP
.I "\-forceuser"
Force the simulator into user-mode.  The simulator normally
auto-detects which mode to run in, but this option is available to
force user-mode in case auto-detection fails for some reason.
.TP
.I "\-forcesystem"
Force the simulator into system-mode.  The simulator normally
auto-detects which mode to run in, but this option is available to
force system-mode in case auto-detection fails for some reason.
.TP
.I "\-strace"
This option displays all the system calls executed by the user level programs.
It is only valid when running in user-mode. The output looks like
a highly simplified version of output from strace(1).
.TP
.I "\-i file"
Process initialization <file> at startup.
.TP
.I "\-icnt"
Store instruction counts in <file>.
.TP
.I "\-rest"
Restore simulation state from <file>.
.TP
.I "\-stats"
Display execution run-time and instruction rate.
.TP
.I "\-palen <n>"
Implemented physical address bits.  Default: n=63
.TP
.I "\-valen <n>"
Implemented virtual address bits.  Default: n=61
.TP
.I "\-ridlen <n>"
Implemented RR.rid bits.  Default: n=24
.TP
.I "\-keylen <n>"
Implemented PKR.key bits.  Default: n=24
.TP
.I "\-grlen <n>"
General Register file size.  Default: n=128
.SH Running in user-mode
To run a simple IA-64 program in user-mode only, you can type in the
following:

.nf
$ bskinc my_ia64_prg
.fi

.PP
This will force execution is the current terminal and in batch mode.

.BR IMPORTANT:
.I To run dynamically linked IA-64 binaries, it is necessary to have
IA-64 versions of the necessary shared libraries installed.  On x86
Linux, this is most easily accomplished by installing the NUE(1)
environment.

.SH Running in system-mode
To run a Linux kernel on top of the simulator, you need several
components:
.PP
\- a Linux kernel compiled to use the HP-simulator.  It needs to have
the CONFIG_SIMSERIAL, CONFIG_SIMSCSI, and CONFIG_SIMETH options turned
on.

.PP
\- a boot loader that goes with it (compiled with "make boot" in the
kernel source tree).

.PP
\- a disk image file with IA-64 binaries on it.

Please refer to extra documentation to learn in greater details how to
build those 3 components.

Once you have those components, you launch execution by simply typing:
.TP
.nf
$ ski bootloader vmlinux simscsi=/path/sd simeth=eth0
.fi
.PP
In this example, the simscsi= option informs the Linux kernel where to
find the SCSI disk images. Here /path/sd is just the prefix, the
kernel will automatically look for /path/sd{a,b,c,...}. So the disk
image must use the full name, i.e., /path/sda. The simeth= indicates
which local interface to use for the simulated Ethernet driver. The
simulator must be run with root privilege to get the networking
emulation to work.

You can specify other options on the command line, just like you would
do at the LILO boot prompt for instance.

.SH Getting help inside ski

When you run ski in interactive mode via ski you can get help
on commands by typing help.

When running in curses mode, you must make sure that you have the
.BR PAGER
environment variable set to whatever is your preferred pager command. It is 
usually set to more(1) or less(1). If the variable does not exist ski will
default to using less(1).  Note that less(1) usually behaves the best when
interacting with ski.

.SH ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES
.TP
.I
.BR SKI_USE_FAKE_XTERM
If this environment variable is set (the value is unimportant),
the ski-fake-xterm(1) utility will be used for output to stdout,
instead of xterm(1).  This will result in a temporary file created
in the current working directory with a name of the form "ski.XXXXXX",
where "XXXXXX" can be any six characters.

.SH SEE ALSO
qemu(1), bochs(1)

.SH AUTHORS
.nf
Hewlett-Packard Company
Stephane Eranian <eranian@hpl.hp.com>
David Mosberger  <davidm@hpl.hp.com>
.fi
